mvs and processing order (#3682)
ClickHouse/clickhouse-docs: docs/materialized-view/incremental-materialized-view.md

1 row in set. Elapsed: 0.006 sec.
```

## Parallel vs sequential processing {#materialized-views-parallel-vs-sequential}

As shown in the previous example, a table can act as the source for multiple Materialized Views. The order in which these are executed depends on the setting [`parallel_view_processing`](/operations/settings/settings#parallel_view_processing).

By default, this setting is equal to `0` (`false`), meaning Materialized Views are executed sequentially in `uuid` order.

> For example, consider the following `source` table and 3 Materialized Views, each sending to a `target` table:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, consider the following `source` table and 3 Materialized Views, each sending rows to a `target` table:
```

Notice that each of the views pauses 1 second prior to inserting their rows to the `target` table while also including their name and insertion time.

Inserting a row into the table `source` takes ~3 seconds, with each view executing sequentially:

```sql
INSERT INTO source VALUES ('test')

1 row in set. Elapsed: 3.786 sec.
```

We can confirm the arrival of rows from each row with a `SELECT`:

```sql
SELECT
    message,
    from,
    now
FROM target
ORDER BY now ASC

┌─message─┬─from─┬───────────────────────────now─┐
│ test    │ mv3  │ 2025-04-15 14:52:01.306162309 │
│ test    │ mv1  │ 2025-04-15 14:52:02.307693521 │
│ test    │ mv2  │ 2025-04-15 14:52:03.309250283 │
└─────────┴──────┴───────────────────────────────┘

3 rows in set. Elapsed: 0.015 sec.
```

This aligns with the `uuid` of the views:

```sql
SELECT
    name,
 uuid
FROM system.tables
WHERE name IN ('mv_1', 'mv_2', 'mv_3')
ORDER BY uuid ASC

┌─name─┬─uuid─────────────────────────────────┐
│ mv_3 │ ba5e36d0-fa9e-4fe8-8f8c-bc4f72324111 │
│ mv_1 │ b961c3ac-5a0e-4117-ab71-baa585824d43 │
│ mv_2 │ e611cc31-70e5-499b-adcc-53fb12b109f5 │
└──────┴──────────────────────────────────────┘

3 rows in set. Elapsed: 0.004 sec.
```

> Conversely, consider if set insert a row with `parallel_view_processing=1` enabled. With this, the views are executed in parallel, giving no guarantees with respect to the order of delivery to the target table:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Conversely, consider what happens if we insert a row with `parallel_view_processing=1` enabled. With this enabled, the views are executed in parallel, giving no guarantees to the order at which rows arrive to the target table:
```

```sql
TRUNCATE target;
SET parallel_view_processing = 1;

INSERT INTO source VALUES ('test');

1 row in set. Elapsed: 1.588 sec.

SELECT
    message,
    from,
    now
FROM target
ORDER BY now ASC

┌─message─┬─from─┬───────────────────────────now─┐
│ test    │ mv3  │ 2025-04-15 19:47:32.242937372 │
│ test    │ mv1  │ 2025-04-15 19:47:32.243058183 │
│ test    │ mv2  │ 2025-04-15 19:47:32.337921800 │
└─────────┴──────┴───────────────────────────────┘

3 rows in set. Elapsed: 0.004 sec.
```

Although our ordering of the arrival of rows from each view is the same, this is not guaranteed - as illustrated by the similarity of each row's insert time. Also note the improved insert performance.

### When to use parallel processing {#materialized-views-when-to-use-parallel}

Enabling `parallel_view_processing=1` can significantly improve insert throughput, as shown above, especially when multiple Materialized Views are attached to a single table. However, it’s important to understand the trade-offs:

> - **Increased insert pressure**: All Materialized Views are executed simultaneously, increasing CPU and memory usage. If each view performs heavy computation or joins, this can overload the system.

Reviewer: We should decide on "joins" vs JOINs". I prefer the latter.

- **Need for strict execution order**: In rare workflows where the order of view execution matters (e.g., chained dependencies), parallel execution may lead to inconsistent state or race conditions. While possible to design around this, such setups are fragile and may break with future versions.

:::note Historical defaults and stability

> Sequential execution was the default for a long time, in part due to error handling complexities. Historically, a failure in one Materialized View could prevent others from executing. Newer versions have improved this by isolating failures per block, but sequential execution still provides clearer failure semantics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sequential execution was the default for a long time, in part due to error handling complexities. Historically, a failure in one Materialized View could prevent others from executing. Newer versions have improved this by isolating failures per block, but sequential execution still provides clearer failure semantics.
```

:::note Common Table Expressions **are not** materialized
ClickHouse does not materialize CTEs; instead, it substitutes the CTE definition directly into the query, which can lead to multiple evaluations of the same expression (if the CTE is used more than once).
:::

Consider the following example which computes daily activity for each post type.

```sql
CREATE TABLE daily_post_activity
(
    Day Date,
 PostType String,
 PostsCreated SimpleAggregateFunction(sum, UInt64),
 AvgScore AggregateFunction(avg, Int32),
 TotalViews SimpleAggregateFunction(sum, UInt64)
)
ENGINE = AggregatingMergeTree
ORDER BY (Day, PostType);

CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW daily_post_activity_mv TO daily_post_activity AS
WITH filtered_posts AS (
    SELECT
 toDate(CreationDate) AS Day,
 PostTypeId,
 Score,
 ViewCount
    FROM posts
    WHERE Score > 0 AND PostTypeId IN (1, 2)  -- Question or Answer
)
SELECT
    Day,
    CASE PostTypeId
        WHEN 1 THEN 'Question'
        WHEN 2 THEN 'Answer'
    END AS PostType,
    count() AS PostsCreated,
    avgState(Score) AS AvgScore,
    sum(ViewCount) AS TotalViews
FROM filtered_posts
GROUP BY Day, PostTypeId;
```

> While the CTE is strictly unnecessary here, and for example purposes, the view will work as expected:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the CTE is strictly unnecessary here, for example purposes, the view will work as expected:
```

    sum(TotalViews) AS TotalViews
FROM daily_post_activity
GROUP BY
    Day,
    PostType
ORDER BY Day DESC
LIMIT 10

┌────────Day─┬─PostType─┬───────────AvgScore─┬─PostsCreated─┬─TotalViews─┐
│ 2024-03-31 │ Question │ 1.3317757009345794 │          214 │       9728 │
│ 2024-03-31 │ Answer   │ 1.4747191011235956 │          356 │          0 │
│ 2024-03-30 │ Answer   │ 1.4587912087912087 │          364 │          0 │
│ 2024-03-30 │ Question │ 1.2748815165876777 │          211 │       9606 │
│ 2024-03-29 │ Question │ 1.2641509433962264 │          318 │      14552 │
│ 2024-03-29 │ Answer   │ 1.4706927175843694 │          563 │          0 │
│ 2024-03-28 │ Answer   │  1.601637107776262 │          733 │          0 │
│ 2024-03-28 │ Question │ 1.3530864197530865 │          405 │      24564 │
│ 2024-03-27 │ Question │ 1.3225806451612903 │          434 │      21346 │
│ 2024-03-27 │ Answer   │ 1.4907539118065434 │          703 │          0 │
└────────────┴──────────┴────────────────────┴──────────────┴────────────┘

10 rows in set. Elapsed: 0.013 sec. Processed 11.45 thousand rows, 663.87 KB (866.53 thousand rows/s., 50.26 MB/s.)
Peak memory usage: 989.53 KiB.
```

> In ClickHouse, CTEs are inlined they are effectively copy-pasted into the query during optimization and **not** materialized. This means:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In ClickHouse, CTEs are inlined which means they are effectively copy-pasted into the query during optimization and **not** materialized. This means:
```

> - If your CTE references a different table from the source table (i.e., the one the Materialized View is attached to), and it's used in a `JOIN` or `IN` clause, it will behave like a subquery or join, not a trigger.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If your CTE references a different table from the source table (i.e., the one the Materialized View is attached to), and is used in a `JOIN` or `IN` clause, it will behave like a subquery or join, not a trigger.
```
